Japan's national sales tax was raised to 10 percent from 8 percent on Tuesday, amid concerns that the long-delayed move could derail the fragile growth path of the world's third largest economy.Officials said ample measures were taken to cushion the impact of the hike after previous tax increases -- a 2-point increase to 5 percent in 1997 and another to 8 percent in 2014 -- brought on recessions.Prime Minister Shinzo Abe postponed this hike twice but said it was unavoidable given rising costs for elder care and a growing national debt as the population ages and shrinks. After decades of fiscal deficits that have taken the debt to more than twice the size of the economy, Abe has promised a return to balance by 2025, but that will require growth to be sustained at a healthy pace.The sales tax hike coincided with the release of data showing business sentiment among large manufacturers worsening in September to its worst level since 2013. The result was better than expected, but the outlook is forecast to deteriorate further by December's quarterly report of the Bank of Japan's survey, called the "tankan.""Particularly affected are producers of basic materials, reflecting recent commodity market movements, as well as producers of general-purpose and production machinery, who are exposed to risks posed by recent re-escalation of U.S.-China trade frictions," Oxford Economics said in a commentary.Other data released this week have shown industrial output decreasing in August, while unemployment remained at a 26-year low of 2.2 percent. The economy expanded at an annual pace of 1.8 percent in April-June, faster than anticipated. But slowing exports and rising prices for oil are expected to drag growth lower in coming months.The sales tax increase covers most goods and services from clothes, electronics to transportation and medical fees, but the government has sought to soften its impact with tax breaks for home and car purchases. It also kept the tax for groceries unchanged for low-income households and is providing free pre-school education to families.<U+00A0> "We'll take expeditious and utmost efforts to ward off any risk of a downward swing in the economy," Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga said on the eve of the tax hike.Analysts say the tax hike poses a deflationary risk at a time of growing uncertainty over trade tensions between the U.S. and China. That's after years of ultra-loose monetary policy aimed at trying to convince businesses and consumers to spend more money. More than six years after Bank of Japan Gov. Haruhiko Kuroda launched his "big bazooka" injections of billions of dollars of cash into the economy, aimed at prying the country out of its deflationary doldrums"Considering the current economic conditions, the timing is bad," said Toshihiro Nagahama, chief economist at Dai-ichi Life Research Institute. He noted that the economy has slowed since late last year and that demand generated by the construction boom for the Tokyo 2020 Olympics is fading. The fear is that might undo years of efforts to escape a deflationary rut where falling prices due to slack demand depress investment, a main driver of growth.The tax hike will put an estimated additional burden on households of more than 2 trillion yen ($18 billion). The exceptions and incentives built into the new sales tax regime are causing confusion. For instance, purchases "to go" at Starbucks Coffee outlets are still taxed at 8 percent, while customers choosing to dine in have to pay 10 percent.Businesses are adapting with price cuts and rewards for cashless payments to attract customers. So economists said there was not a huge rush to beat the increase. That may mean the higher tax's impact will be less severe than the blows of previous hikes."Stores seem to provide discounts, so I will go for those, plus, I don't plan to buy luxurious goods with big price tags," Junko Matsumoto, a homemaker in her 60s, said as she walked past a Tokyo train station. "I must admit the tax increase was unavoidable."Toru Yokoyama, a 31-year-old office worker, was less upbeat. "The government could have taken measures other than tax increase, but it's already done and there is not much I can do at this point," he said. "I don't think my shopping patterns would change very much, but I may not be able to go on trips as often as used to."
China has developed a giant new offshore oil exploration platform for possible use in disputed tracts of sea, a move that would anger Vietnam and extend years of energy-related disputes between the two Asian neighbors.The platform dubbed Haiyang Shiyou 982 sits over the sea now, ready to seek oil deposits up to 9,000 meters deep, a Chinese social media account run by the Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission reported Wednesday. Boats from Vietnam and China rammed one another in 2014 after China allowed an offshore oil firm to position the platform's predecessor, Haiyang Shiyou 981, in disputed waters. Earlier this year, Vietnam asked a Chinese survey vessel to leave Vanguard Bank, a maritime feature where the Southeast Asian country is looking for fuel under the seabed.Expect more resistance if Haiyang Shiyou 982 ruffles Vietnam, analysts warn. "They will have some kind of reaction for sure, because the South China Sea is by no means cool in terms of temperature," said Alan Chong, associate professor at the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies in Singapore. "It can flare up at any moment." The worst case could reignite a sometimes violent two-way spat over maritime sovereignty that goes back to the 1970s.◆ Haiyang Shiyou 982Chinese-language media reports said in early 2018 the sixth-generation drilling platform had been "delivered" in the northeastern port city Dalian. The platform should improve the equipment for China's offshore drilling work, those reports said.The commission said media had been invited to observe operations aboard the 10-story-high platform. It did not say where at sea the platform was deployed but said the site was about a one-hour helicopter ride from Sanya in southern China. Sea tracts along the mainland Chinese shoreline are not contested.Brunei, China, Malaysia, Taiwan, Vietnam and the Philippines claim all or parts of the 3.5 million-square-kilometer sea. China, which calls about 90 percent of the waterway its own, has taken a military and technological lead over the past decade. Other countries, for example, often contract for oil exploration while China relies heavily on its own rigs.The U.S. Energy Information Agency estimates 11 billion barrels' worth of oil under the South China Sea along with 190 trillion cubic feet of natural gas.◆ Vietnam vs. ChinaThe 981 rig's 2014 deployment also set off deadly anti-China rioting in Vietnam. The Vanguard Bank flap this year led to a standoff after the Chinese energy survey ship, the Haiyang Dizhi 8, began patrolling waters near Vanguard Bank 352 kilometers off the coast of southeastern Vietnam. Vietnam operates an undersea energy exploration platform nearby.Vietnam sometimes works with foreign companies, such as the Spanish firm Repsol and ONGC Videsh of India, on exploration contracts. Beijing resents foreign influence in the South China Sea and pressures Vietnam to stop some of the joint projects."I think [the new platform] is probably not to consolidate the Chinese sovereignty, but it's to undermine the effort or the attempt of Vietnam to pursue joint exploration with other countries," said Yun Sun, East Asia Program senior associate at the Stimson Center think tank in Washington.◆ Strategic Gain for ChinaChina's new platform strengthens its control over the disputed sea and could be even read as a "second front" of resistance against the United States, Chong said. The U.S. government does not claim the South China Sea but advocates keeping it open internationally. The U.S. Navy regularly sends ships into the sea and China criticizes the passages as foreign interference.If questioned by other governments about the new oil platform, Chong said, China could say the platform is purely aimed at drilling for oil.The platform could also send a signal to the Philippines, among others, about China's willingness to explore jointly for oil or gas in the disputed sea, said Herman Kraft, political science professor at the University of the Philippines.Manila and Beijing said earlier this year they would explore together and let the Philippines take 60 percent of any discoveries. That deal extends Beijing's effort to get along with the other South China Sea claimants and limit U.S. influence in the region, Asian maritime scholars have said.China hopes to start the project with Manila while Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte is in office through 2022, Kraft said. Duterte began pursuing friendship with China in 2016, a departure from his predecessor. "At this point, this is really more of China trying to make sure that they're going to being able to take advantage of Duterte's still being in power and being able to move forward that memorandum of understanding into something that's actually more operational," he said.
China has demanded that Washington drop sanctions imposed on Chinese companies and executives for transporting Iranian oil.<U+00A0> The foreign ministry on Thursday criticized the use of U.S. laws against Chinese companies and called on the Trump administration to "immediately correct the wrong approach."A ministry spokesman, Geng Shuang, said China's dealings with Iran are in line with international law "and must be respected."The penalties announced Wednesday by U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo apply to six Chinese companies and their chief executives. They include units of major Chinese state-owned companies.Geng said Washington "disregards the legitimate rights and interests of all parties and wields the stick of sanctions at will. It tramples on the basic norms governing international relations."
The United States is announcing new sanctions on Chinese entities for "knowingly transporting oil from Iran contrary to United States sanctions," Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said in New York on Wednesday.The measures targeting five Chinese individuals and six entities, including two COSCO Shipping corporation Ltd. subsidiaries, are the latest move by the U.S. to intensify what it calls the maximum pressure campaign against Iran."We're also imposing sanctions on the executive officers of those companies as well," said Pompeo at a forum on the sidelines of United Nations General Assembly, adding "we will sanction every violation of sanctionable activity."The sanctions target COSCO Shipping Tanker Company and COSCO Shipping Tanker Seaman and Ship Management Company but do not apply to the parent company. China Concord Petroleum Co., Kunlun Shipping Company Ltd., Kunlun Holding Company Ltd and Pegasus 88 Limited, are also targeted.Last week, President Donald Trump ordered the U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to "substantially increase" sanctions on Iran, following missile and drone strikes against the world's largest crude-processing plant and oils field in Saudi Arabia. U.S. officials have accused Iran of carrying out the attacks. Tehran has denied the claim.
U.S. President Donald Trump said Tuesday that while the United States does not seek conflict with any other nation, he will not hesitate to defend America's interests."The United States, after having spent $2.5 trillion since my re-election to rebuild our great military, is also by far the world's most powerful nation," he told a room full of world leaders. "Hopefully it will never have to use this power."Trump stressed that the U.S. does not seek conflict with any country. "We desire peace, cooperation and mutual gain with all, but I will never fail to defend America's interests," he told the United Nations General Assembly.Trump pointed to the regime in Iran as one of the greatest global threats, saying it oppresses its citizens at home while fueling conflicts and terrorism beyond its borders. He said as long as this continues, U.S. sanctions will not be lifted, they will be tightened.But the U.S. president left open the door to diplomacy, noting that some of America's past enemies are now its closest friends. "The United States has never believed in permanent enemies," he said. "We want partners, not adversaries."After the Sept. 14 attacks on two Saudi oil installations, which the U.S. has on blamed Iran, hopes evaporated for a possible encounter between the U.S. and Iranian presidents on the sidelines of the General Assembly. Iran has denied responsibility for the attacks.While U.S. and Iranian officials have said their leaders are not going to meet, some diplomats are holding out hope there could be an encounter to try to de-escalate tensions.<U+00A0> French President Emmanuel Macron met late Monday with the Iranian president and the French Press Agency reported that German Chancellor Angela Merkel would holding separate meetings with both Trump and Iranian President Hassan Rouhani on Tuesday.◆ Trade WarDuring his UN address Tuesday, President Trump also had strong words for China, saying it would not be allowed to "game" the international trade system any longer. The outcome of his trade war could impact his 2020 re-election hopes and he sought to reassure his domestic audience."The American people are absolutely committed to restoring balance to our relationship with China," he said. "Hopefully we can reach an agreement that will be beneficial for both countries, but as I have made very clear, I will not accept a bad deal for the American people."He said Washington is also watching Beijing's actions in Hong Kong, where months of pro-democracy protests have turned violent.◆ Warns MigrantsIn his own hemisphere, Trump focused on another issue that is important to his political base -- the flow of undocumented migrants into the United States."Many of the countries here today are coping with the challenges of uncontrolled migration," Trump said. "Each of you has the absolute right to protect your borders and so of course, does our country."He urged Central Americans not to pursue migration north. "To anyone conducting crossings of our border illegally, please hear these words: Do not pay the smugglers, do not pay the coyotes. Do not put yourself in danger. Do not put your children in danger", he said. "Because if you make it here, you will not be allowed in. You will be promptly returned home."Trump also accused activists and non-governmental organizations both in the U.S. and abroad of fueling the migration crisis under the guise of social justice, saying they fuel the smugglers by encouraging people to keep coming to the U.S.And he thanked President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador of Mexico for sending 27,000 troops to his northern border to keep migrants from entering the United States. "Mexico is showing us great respect and I respect them in return," Trump said.The president also sent warnings to leaders in Venezuela, Nicaragua and Cuba. "The dictator [Nicolas] Maduro is a Cuban puppet, protected by Cuban body guards, hiding from own people," he said. "While Cuba plunders Venezuela's oil wealth to sustain its own corrupt communist rule." He said the United States is united behind the Venezuelan people.President Trump only briefly touched on his diplomatic efforts with Pyongyang, noting that North Korea is a country with full of untapped potential. He did not say when he might meet again with leader Kim Jong-un.During last year's address, Trump drew laughter when he boasted that his administration "accomplished more than almost any administration in the history of our country." This year, he drew neither laughs nor applause during his speech. Just very brief applause at the end.Trump has pulled hundreds of millions of dollars in U.S. funding to UN peacekeeping, refugee and reproductive health programs since coming to office in January 2017. He has also withdrawn from several multilateral agreements and quit the UN human rights council and the UN's Educational and Scientific agency. But he seems to enjoy the annual exercise of addressing world leaders at the General Assembly, where he draws a large and attentive crowd.
